---
layout: single
title:  "How to Take the Train"
author: "Benjamin D. Killeen"
date: 2021-01-15
permalink: /posts/2021/03/how-to-take-the-train/
tags:
  - Chicago
  - Missouri
---

The Amtrak overlooks a lot of cornfields in between Chicago and St. Louis. Of course, there are
also creekbeds, interstates, and cul-de-sacs; minor leage baseball stadiums; and a grafittied
concrete beam at Union station which reads, "Have a great day."  These attractions notwithstanding,
the train's predominant view consists of corn: row after row of that patchwork Midwest quilt
knitted in the Earth.

I used to take the Amtrak at the end of every quarter. I could have driven, if I owned a car, or
flown from Midway airport, but the Southwest flight cost \\$138, while a single seat on the Texas
Eagle, a double-decker corrugated tin snake with polyester blue curtains and no wifi, sold for
\\$27. The train was correspondingly slow. The lone star locomotive never exceeded 90 mph on its
southward journey, and it ran the risk of breaking down or sharing track with sluggish freight
trains, which for arcane reasons actually had priority over passenger rail. Over my four years in
Chicago, I experienced numerous delays. In fact, my family grew accustomed to timing their
departure based on Find my iPhone rather than the stated schedule, so as to occupy that
pale-fluorescent waiting room inside the Gateway Transportation Center for as little time as
possible. In one instance, my 9 A.M. departure broke down just outside of Joplin, at 9:40. I spent
the next twelve hours texting back and forth about the second engine breaking down as well, the
linkup with 11:30's Texas Eagle to the rescue, and the lack of horsepower that resulted in our
combined ten-mile-an-hour crawl across the snowy fields of Illinois. It was December 2016. My
family had tickets to *A Christmas Carol* at 8:30, half the day beyond when I was scheduled to
arrive, but still I didn't make it.

After that debacle, my family paid the Southwest fee whenever my arrival coincided with some other
scheduled plan, be it Christmas plays at home, Thanksgiving in Kansas City, or vacation in
Wisconsin's north woods. At the same time, I made connections in California, where I have twice
interned, and Maryland, where I landed after undergrad. As a result, I have endured the airports of
a dozen Midwest towns, as well as those of both the far-flung, non-flyover coasts this country has
to offer, and I can confidently call myself a fair reviewer of the airborn mode of travel, albeit
domestically.

I have this to say: where the aeroplane excels in timeliness, the Amtrak offers comfort. Those
cardboard cutouts that Southwest calls chairs can hardly hold a candle to the deep cushions and
Lazy-boy leg rests that have lulled me half to sleep on more than one occasion, aided in no small
part by the gentle swaying of the Texas Eagle's upper deck and the choruses of *Transatlanticism*
playing through my headphones, unimpeded by the roar of Boeing jets or babies crying. Indeed,
despite its tardiness, the train itself came to represent more of homecoming in my mind either than
St. Louis at the one end or Chicago at the other. Such was my exhaustion at the quarter's end that
slumber sometimes carried me from one downtown into another. Otherwise, I entertained myself with
leisures I could not enjoy while classes culled my time, such as several Netflix episodes or a
single game of Civilization VI. Once, in an unusual burst of train-bound productivity, I started
programming a [Rubik's cube solver](https://github.com/benjamindkilleen/functional-rubiks-solver),
which would come to occupy the hours of my 2016 holiday in between the family parties.

In this manner, the train accomplishes what flying tends to fail at: transition. In the air, I
seldom have a sense of travel. I may as well take the hotel elevator from one carbon copied hallway
to another, the journey leaving little indication of having taken place other than a wrenching in
my gut and a ringing in my ear. Hotel hallways are identical by design. Airports, despite
innumerable idiosyncracies, possess an overwhelming sameness. On the other hand, trains stations
inherit character from the surrounding countryside. Even the Gateway Transportation Center, a
soulless grey slab squeezed beneath the interstate, boasts a riverside view of downtown St. Louis
on approach. At the end of every quarter, I returned home to the Arch's ghostly gleam, cut right
across the moonlit Mississippi, seeming more like mirage than a building's reflection. Every city has a
tarmac. Only my hometown has that particular stretch of track.

Every time, that is, except December 2016, when my ride experienced two engine failures before
linking up with another line. Dad, not wanting me to miss *A Christmas Carol*, decided to intercept
the Franken-train in Springfield or maybe Lincoln, depending on its progress. These were optimistic
estimates. Dad passed through Springfield without stopping, and in Lincoln he called to confirm my
slow crawl through northern Illinois. Hours later, he finally reached me in Bloomington-Normal, a
college town situated halfway between St. Louis and Chicago. I disembarked in downtown Normal, and
the train slouched on without me. Christmas lights lit up the wintry night. I found Dad's SUV in the
parking lot, and he loaded my bags into the trunk. By then, we had no hope of making the play, so
Dad looked up an Irish pub on Apple Maps and bought me dinner. I devoured it hungrily. Then we
drove the whole way home, catching up on politics, extended family, and the latest Netflix drama
while just outside, the endless snow-covered cornfields swallowed up the nighttime highway's
scattered light, fading toward the flat horizon unnoticed.
