---
layout: single
title:  "How to Hold Office Hours"
categories: 
tags:
  - Chicago
  - writing
---

I asked Professor O'Leary for coffee, and instead he took me bird watching. The man had a routine,
on the Tuesday afternoons he spent at UChicago, and since bird watching goes just as well with
conversation as a heavy cappuccino, he invited me along For my part, I found it amusing tbut not
out of character for Prof. O'Leary, whom I will hereafter refer to by his name, for that is what he
prefers to be called. Peter O'Leary wore the kind of glasses that can only be described as
spectacles and a wide brimmed hat much like a wizard's to my memory, although it was actually a
modest bucket hat. Yet the man was so much like a wizard himself that the conical cap seems just as
likely and better suited to him. Peter O'Leary taught creative writing, and I had taken two of his
courses: "Intro to Genres: Science Fiction" and the more succinctly titled "Wizards."

Peter O'Leary's invitation to go bird watching surprised me at first, but upon reflection it proved
to be in keeping with his usual mode of office hours. In both classes, the professor conducted
on-on-one meetings with every student while walking around the Midway, a twenty-five or thirty
minute circuit, in all manner of purportedly unpleasant Chicago weather. He discussed our creative
work and, in doing so, opened a door that young authors so rarely find and never search for:
someone willing to listen to stories which haven't been written yet. Peter understood why already
burnt-out UChicago students took his classes, which boasted a fair bit of work, and not Taps, the
much sought-after drama class which fulfills the same requirement without any writing. His students
each had a story to write. For the final project, Peter encouraged his students to submit excerpts
from novels they were writing, related to course material. More than a few did.

During his office hours, however, Peter O'Leary didn't overly concern himself with official
matters. He talked about any subject at all, in the way that only a great listener can. What
inspired this story or that one? Where do your characters draw inspiration? What do you want to get
out of writing, and where do you imagine submitting what you've written?

This last question, so prevalent in all our minds, weighed on mine no less. I fear I never utilized
Peter O'Leary's office hours as I should have, when I was in his class. I took his second course,
Science Fiction, in the Winter of my fourth year, and even though I wrote the first chapters of my
current novel-in-progress, I failed to ask the right questions when it came my turn to traverse the
Midway.
